#labels gene,OBI
#Matt's proposal for genetic material

= Genetic material discussion in OBI group =

Matthew Brush via lists.sourceforge.net 10:27 AM (4 hours ago)

to OBI 


Hello.  Recent requests have prompted us to revisit an unresolved issue from 2011 (https://groups.google.com/d/msg/obi-developer/EdqD5EZ8rFg/NpcIqeRp_QwJ), regarding the need for a 'genetic/genomic material' class in OBI (final label pending). This was discussed on developer calls over the last two weeks and the following definition agreed upon:
 
“a nucleic acid macromolecule that is part of a cell or virion and is inherited from an immediate ancestor, or incorporated in a manner that it has the disposition to be replicated and inherited by descendants.”
 
Naturally occurring or experimentally incorporated nucleic acids that meet these criteria can qualify as genetic/genomic material. For example, a chromosomally-integrated transgene or a stable extra-chromosomal replicon would qualify.  However, a transiently transfected plasmid or siRNA oligo would not - as these are not able to be replicated and inherited by progeny cells.
 
Feedback/comments welcome over the next week, at which point this will be implemented in OBI. Note that this is a complex an nuanced concept, and our discussions covered many issues, perspectives, and problems (particularly related to experimental genetic material).  A more detailed review of this proposal and related issues can be found in the 3-4-13 call summary notes (https://groups.google.com/forum/#!msg/obi-developer/SSB-6RDckBM/OIm7dDtwcoIJ), and the ppt slides from this call (http://obi.svn.sourceforge.net/viewvc/obi/trunk/docs/developer/OBI%20Developer%20Call%20Presentations/3-4-13_OBI_GeneticMateiral.pptx?view=log).  Please review these documents for more information.
 
Thanks! 
Matt
 
 
Matthew H. Brush
Research Associate
OHSU Ontology Development Group
Department of Medical Informatics and Clinical Epidemiology
Oregon Health and Science University
phone :  919-452-6914
fax :  503-346-6815
brushm@ohsu.edu